# Research_Paper

#Abstract

Microplastics, one of the major threats not only to aquatic but also to terrestrial ecosystems, are among the major environmental threats. The existence of MPs along with harmful impacts on human and animal health has led to the demand for highly sophisticated detection and remedial measures. This paper looks at the application of artificial intelligence and environmental science to enhance MPs' identification, classification, and monitoring. AI has proven to have vast potential in automating labour-intensive processes by incorporating machine learning and deep learning approaches. This will enhance the accuracy and speed of MP analysis in soils and waters. Advances in AI in spectrum analysis technologies, such as FTIR spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, hyperspectral imaging, and computer vision, among others, have transformed the detection of MP. FTIR and Raman spectroscopy vary based on the specific spectral signatures for different types of MP. HSI captures both spatial and spectral information for highly detailed environmental studies.
Moreover, image processing technologies reduce manual intervention in MP quantification. Recent breakthroughs include transformer neural networks and deep learning models that have led to high accuracy in MP classification, segmentation, and quantification. Advancement has been brought forth by the utilization of emerging technologies, for example, real-time collection and characterization of MP with the use of robotics and AI. The AI framework now includes data preparation, analytics, visualization, and human-computer interaction; thus, allowing tasks like spectral data translation, and data augmentation to overcome imbalance concerns, and a user-friendly graphic interface. This advancement by in-situ and real-time detection technologies including AI-based digital in-line holographic microscopy opens doors to determine the nano- and microplastics in a dynamic system without the process of preparation. Still, much effort remains to be taken and lots of work should be in practice. State-of-art AI models remain unexplained with high computability values that demand highly massive varied datasets. So to tackle this, we are in urgent need of generalized MP data and low-complex performance algorithms. Robotics and machine intelligence can highly enhance MP mitigation and collection activities. This essay focuses on the revolutionary potential of artificial intelligence in environmental monitoring, and to apply new solutions to meet the global problem of microplastic pollution and maintaining ecosystem health.